I'm joined Now by UNICEF spokesperson
James Elder he joins me from Geneva
James has recently returned from gas and
now before we speak to him I want to
play out now a video now this was posted
on social media by James when he was in
Gaza let's watch
it I feel like I'm running out of ways
to describe the horrors hitting children
here I feel like I'm almost failing in
my ability to convey the endless killing
of Children Here a and so perhaps if the
world could see those at risk
meet HED and
Hannah please meet them see them and
pray that they are all alive in a few
days
time all right James you said perhaps if
the world can see them are you
disappointed in how the world has
responded since seeing them The Killing
go goes
on oh of course I think anyone anyone
who who has watched and listened and
seen is has had their heartbroken
whether they're in Gaza and have have
witnessed it firsthand to see to smell
to hear the cries of children to watch a
mother a mother another mother watch as
as they as they farewell their child as
their child dies I think a huge number
of people around the world their hearts
have opened to the immense unparalleled
unparalled I your pardon unparalleled
suffering to children but we we must
still talk about those who have the
power we must still talk about those who
have the power to finally influence a
ceasefire and to to to put a stop to
what has been a merciless merciless
attack on children when when UNICEF C
talks about it being a war on children
we don't use those words lightly this is
because 40% of those killed have been
children and we don't see those numbers
and conflicts there is something deeply
wrong about that Sammy and what's wrong
there is the the indiscriminate the the
merciless attacks and you listen to the
authorities they're unmoved by the
Numbers they they they're absolutely
indifferent to the numbers of children
killed and we see that with
proportionality that an entire apartment
block one after the other after the
other is destroyed family after family
as I'm sure you've shown in your
programs I met so many pal Ians recently
who now no longer bunker down with the
whole family they split the family in in
halves in different places hoping that
if a if another bombardment hits
somewhere half of the family
survives yes it is mindboggling to me
and entirely disheartening that those in
power have not heard this and if not
from a principled moral point of view
have not heard it to understand the
damage it is doing to the region and to
the world and how far we are moving from
peace and how polarization is taking
over James of course we have to remember
Israeli children have been caught in
this conflict as well particularly in
the attacks of October the 7th but the
sense that I get when I speak to
humanitarian workers to Aid agency
officials repeatedly is that what's
happening in Gaza is something
unprecedented something even journalists
telling me for decades I've worked in
War Z I've never seen anything like this
why explain this to the
world yeah you give me a chill when you
say that Sammy and you're right and
every moment we get a chance get the
those Israeli children who somewhere
underground with our men get them back
to their families they should you know
their children stop the torment of yes
when journalists myself talk about
unprecedented yes it is both because 40%
of children have been killed both
because it's the most ridiculous number
in a short space of time both because
more un workers have been killed in this
conflict this war that in the United
Nations history and then you have this
immense darkness that shows the utter
indifference today is the first time
when I'm on the phone talking to
colleagues and friends and health
workers in the Gaza Strip that that a
significant number of people now if they
can only prioritize one concern for
quite a number Sammy it is no longer the
15 bombardment 200 lb bombs whatever
they are raining down from the sky it's
the lack of water you now have this idea
of
dehydration people dying being a real
threat I spoke to someone today whose
mother has not had clean water for in a
day and they three-year-old have not had
clean water for a day we are going to
start seeing not just disease outbreaks
we already have the perfect storm but
we're going to see people dying of
dehydration so when we have these safe
spaces that are so designated there's
such a cynical cynical world word not
once have I ever heard any implication
from those people talking about safe
spaces to even imply that there would be
what they are legally and morally
legally obliged to water medicine food
protection there is not a a scar of
interest and not a drop of water and not
a toilet to be seen for hundreds of
thousands of people in in neighborhoods
on the streets um in Dusty fields in in
broken buildings nothing and that to me
speaks to the the the coldness and the
callousness and and those those
authorities being absolutely unmoved by
the death of children and women and that
on a scale in the size of the Gaza when
you have such a density and now another
million people having moved to the South
1.8 displaced when you have that mindset
this emotional anger out outrage to
civilians in Gaza that's why you hear
these things of unprecedent Ed because
the loss of life and the devastation and
the trauma is utterly
unprecedented James not only in terms of
the death and destruction but also the
situation in which Aid agencies feel
they are frozen they can't act we just
heard from Martin Griffith saying
basically our humanitarian operations
our humanitarian program is no longer
functioning I mean how unprecedented is
that that there's not even a
safe not a not only no safe area for
kids to go to but no help to come to
them thank you and remembering that as
the occupying power this again is
Israel's responsibility Sammy if there
were no bombs if we had not seen
whatever grotesque historic number of
bombardments and artillery artillery on
the children and their families in Gaza
what we have now just by the fence of
60% of homes being destroyed destroyed
and the adolescent girls having to Quee
5 hours for a toilet in a shelter now
they're not in shelters they're on a
Dusty strip somewhere the threat of
disease already we have 30 times rates
of diarrhea for children this would be
the highest level humanitarian crisis
that the UN would designate in its
systems we have that and we have this
unrelenting vicious
bombardment and so we and we do not have
we do not have aid supplies going in you
know we so the restrictions on Aid you
know for me as a humanitarian very
frequently when I'm in hospitals my role
in a way is to Bear witness and try then
at the highest levels to explain to
bring a human face to the to the to the
people to share the stories of of a you
know young guy just for those who don't
understand what's stopping you from
going in for your teams going into Gaza
aside of obviously the obvious danger of
bombings when you talk about
restrictions right now yeah right now
grow restrictions on the number of
trucks that come in as you heard the the
simple one the one entry point um not
being allowed to access the north
restricted from accessing the North and
then the South yes we continue to
function in the South we continue to
function in the South but not at any
scale and we must be honest about that
and to think that it could possibly be
at that scale when as you know we've
said many times before the atrocity of
7th of October 500 trucks a day 500
commercial then for two months 50 none
20 so it's not enough it's not enough
and we are going to see people dying of
dehydration and disease whilst they get
bombarded a very chillig warning there
but thank you so much James
Elder thank you